Problem:

https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-element/

Problem Description:

Given an integer array nums and an integer val, remove all occurrences of val in nums in-place. The order of the elements may be changed. Then return the number of elements in nums which are not equal to val.
Consider the number of elements in nums which are not equal to val be k, to get accepted, you need to do the following things:
Change the array nums such that the first k elements of nums contain the elements which are not equal to val. The remaining elements of nums are not important as well as the size of nums.
Return k.
Example:
Input: nums = [3,2,2,3], val = 3
Output: 2, nums = [2,2,_,_]
Explanation: Your function should return k = 2, with the first two elements of nums being 2.
It does not matter what you leave beyond the returned k (hence they are underscores).


Solution:

My solution uses an efficient approach to take all specified values from an array and move them to the end, then return the number of elements in the array not equal to val. It uses a two-pointer technique, with one pointer “left” starting from the beginning of the array and the other pointer “right” starting from the end. The solution loops until the left pointer meets the right. When the value at “left” matches the target val, it is swapped with the value at the right pointer, which moves that element to the end of the array and moves pointer “right” to the left one. If the value at left does not match val, the left pointer is incremented. The process continues until all our unwanted vals have been moved all the way to the right, which is precisely when the two pointers meet. The time complexity of this solution is O(N), where N is the number of elements in the input vector, as each element is processed at most once.

Key Points: 

Two-pointer approach: The solution uses two pointers, left and right, to traverse the array from both ends. The left pointer moves forward, while the right pointer moves backward whenever a matching element is found and swapped.
In-place modification: When an element matches the target value val, it is swapped with the element at the right pointer, which effectively removes it from the active portion of the array without using extra space.
Time complexity O(N): The algorithm has a linear time complexity of O(N), where N is the number of elements in the array. Each element is either incremented or swapped at most once, ensuring efficiency.

Code Solutions:

C++:
	class Solution {
public:
    int removeElement(vector<int>& nums, int val) {
        int left = 0;
        int right = nums.size() - 1;


        while (left <= right) {
            if (nums[left] == val) {
                nums[left] = nums[right];
                right--;
            } else {
                left++;
            }
        }


        return left;
    }
};








Python:

class Solution(object):
    def removeElement(self, nums, val):
        left = 0
        right = len(nums) - 1


        while left <= right:
            if nums[left] == val:
                nums[left] = nums[right]
                right -= 1
            else:
                left += 1
       
        return left


Javascript:


/**
 * @param {number[]} nums
 * @param {number} val
 * @return {number}
 */
var removeElement = function(nums, val) {
      let left = 0;
        let right = nums.length - 1;


        while (left <= right) {
            if (nums[left] === val) {
                nums[left] = nums[right];
                right--;
            } else {
                left++;
            }
        }


        return left;
    }




       



